Welcome to Week 11 of game development, we are moving right along. And we finally covered
Well, just so much territory. It's time for a little review and
A little quiz and midterm exam on the world of JavaScript and the Fraser JS game engine. I'll talk about that this week and also look ahead to where we're headed for the remainder of the semester together.
Have just a handful of small concepts to share with you that
Need to filter into your brain as you kind of
Wrap up the majority of rethinking about how Fazer works.
Pair for the midterm.
This week, so this week, we've got two major things to accomplish in week 11 do some review and tackle the midterm exam.
part one. Part two is think about the game that you'd like to build for the rest of the semester and prepare a brief design document a brief narrative.
About the game that you want to create. It's a proposal. It's a pitch, if you will.
Next week, I will show a handful of additional advanced topics things that we can do, particularly around object oriented programming.
In JavaScript, the Fazer engine lends itself to the development of object based game coding. We have stayed away from that for
The majority of the semester today to make our class more accessible to people that are new to coding, we focused on procedural coding
styles that use simple functions to capture all the code that we need to group together to tackle the various states in the face or game engine. Next week we'll look at developing what
Phase or developers like to call prefabs which are basically sub classes of sprites that are designed specifically for their purpose.
Will also look at using an advanced build system in a cloud nine workspace in a server workspace that can build that can transpire, if you will, will learn about that word more next week, the JavaScript code that we might save in separate files into a consolidated application.
And then we'll really kick into building the final game.
This week there's just a little bit more in the phase or chapter six, we're pretty much wrapping up chapter six. This week, put a
put a bow on it and move on so that we can talk about other topics and chapters 122 through 130 to tackle the remaining topics that I'm going to scratch the surface of today, and then I'll pick up after the midterm with more focus in more detail for y'all.
Terms of software this week. Well, there is no new coding project do this week.
So I've got my default software. This week slide up here, but really what you're probably going to use this week as a word processor, whether it's Google Docs or Microsoft Word or whatever.
Text Editor you like to meet documents in you'll be building a text based document to describe your game project idea as a game design document.
And again, our focus is on Fazer although this week. We're also going to start looking at another game engine is extra credit for folks that are interested in have the bandwidth to tackle more material, we'll start talking about Unity 3D this week.
So three things I want to say just a little bit about today and I do have a code demo for the first one that I'll share with you a few advanced Fazer concepts Fazer supports the ability to generate animated game objects that are not sprites.
It's designed really to deal with these things that we call particles in a particle system.
As a group entity. We don't really have individual access to particles in a particle system.
But we can define what's known as an emitter, which is basically the thing that outputs the particles, you might think about it as well. A fire emits flames. Your sparkler in the Fourth of July parade that you're in mid sparks.
Those are the kinds of things that particle systems are really good at emulating fire smoke sparks the flame coming out of a spaceship engine.
Some Coins popping out of a treasure chest. When the reward is accomplished.
And particle systems exist, mostly because of the taxing amount of math and computations that regular game objects like sprites have to go through
Really limits our ability to introduce a huge number of objects into a game.
So,
That's really part of a theme today about handling.
The computing capacity in Fazer in your web browser optimizing your code to deal with it particles are one aspect of that.
Another topic that. Well, I think we already encountered last week, pretty much.
Is the idea of signals and a sequel as a way to set aside and Fazer an event that should trigger a function that you've written
Like when things collide and P to physics we can associate a signal function that runs when the collision happens or we can do that too with user events like mouse clicks. So signals are an advanced feature if these are let us
Wind our function into the game engine so that it's executed automatically when a particular event happens
And then finally, really just to introduce the idea
Of object oriented programming to our Fazer game pattern coding
say a little bit about prefabs today. And these are really classes of phase or objects, particularly the sprite object where we can basically make a custom sprite that has particular behaviors built into methods of its class or sub classes the case may be.
And in our coming modules will look at this in more depth.
In my code demo today I'll work with particles and I'll show you how those work I do have a handful of other
Fundamental features of the phase or engine, I'd like you to know about that kind of like particle systems lend themselves to speedy game execution.
One of these is the ability to instantly. Take a phase or sprite out of gameplay.
Every sprite has a property, known as exists, and we can remove a game immediately from
An object immediately from the game just by setting the exist property to false.
So if exist is true the sprite is in the game world. It's available in phase or updates all of its calculations in each update game loop.
For that sprite. As soon as the phase, phase or sprite does not exist by setting its exists property to false. We get rid of all that energy that Fazer might spend
On managing the sprite and this exists property plays in to this concept known as object pooling
And I have an article this week in the linked materials in Canvas that talks about object pooling in Fazer and I think this fellow does a really good job melky be as his site is called of explaining the purpose of object pooling
If we've got a lot of objects that we're creating and deleting like enemy sprites, a huge amount of memory is being used and disposed of inside the browser.
And literally the Fazer engine and the browser's JavaScript interpreter can really be dragged down to a very slow processing.
Frame rate. If we have too much memory being created and allocated and then released and that's where object cooling is useful. We create a bunch of sprites in advance.
And we deactivate or kill them and Fazer speak and then reactivate or reset them when we want to reuse them. It's like having a huge cast
Of extras or characters in your screenplay, or your stage drama and instead of going out and hiring new actors off the street, every time you need somebody to come on stage, you keep them backstage waiting off screen.
to reactivate them when it's time for them to come on stage and do their bit
This is a very common.
Pattern of coding Fazer and many game engines that idea that we create a
large cast of sprites that we keep off screen and bring them on screen when we need them. The memories already been allocated for these sprites, they're already occupying space in the browser's brain, if you will.
And we're not deleting inserting them instead we're just saying, Okay, come into the game world now leave the game world now and a great way to do this is to use a group. So in this example, we've got a group added to our game.
Again, he's using arcade physics. So he enabled the body and set the physics body type on that group and then basically in a loop.
He goes through and makes an instance of a sprite.
And then he kills it. And then he stores it in this pool that he can reuse later on. And when he's ready so kill is a way of deactivating a sprite, but keeping it in the pool and reset is a way of bringing that sprite back on stage at a particular coordinate x and y.
This is, I don't know, making a bunch of sprites killing them by taking them off stage and then resetting them as you need them to bring them on stage that yields a performance benefit.
We can use exists with this pattern, along with kill and reset.
So the kill method removes the sprite from the game, but it preserves it in memory. It's no longer visible, the game loop is not going to concern itself with processing the calculations for that sprite.
As long as it's killed, but as soon as we use reset, we can bring that game that sprite that game object back into our game at a particular coordinate
So normally, we'd have an x and y coordinate with reset to reintroduce it onto the stage.
Another way to manage sprites and the time that they're available in the game world is through a property, known as lifespan. It's like setting a future.
death date a future kill time for a sprite lifespan value is set in milliseconds. So if you wanted a sprite when you created it to stay alive for two seconds and then vanish from the game world. You could set its lifespan to 2000 and that would be two seconds.
So all of these exists and lifespan as properties we can work with.
The kill and the reset methods as commands we can call to apply to us. Right. These give us this ability to work with object pooling in a very efficient way.
So that we can manage a large cast of sprites with having to add new sprites during gameplay. That's really, I guess the fundamental takeaway.
You want to prepare a pool of sprites in the Create state before gameplay has begun, and then simply manage their existence, if you will, in the game world through
Kill and reset through things like lifespan and exists that can happen in the update loop quickly and efficiently adding new sprites and update loop is a time and memory killer. It will suck your games responsiveness down into the pit of slow molasses.
So before I do the review, which is where we're headed. Next, let me hop over to my cloud nine workspace and I'll fire up a folder here today.
For module 11
And I'll borrow my JS folder here in my assets folder duplicate them from last week.
rename them.
Duplicate my
Bill your game from last week to just to get some basic starting code here.
This guy particle demo.
Duplicated this because I don't want to have to write
We have to be the basic rapper code to get a game started here, but I will load up the Fazer library like usual. Like I did already in this predefined code and I'll build the game.
Now this guy. I'm going to simplify. I'm just going to worry about the spacebar and also going to worry about this thing that a particle system needs known as an emitter, which has a coordinate in the game area. It's not visible. Usually, but it does need to be available.
And I'll go ahead and preload. The seven or eight
Game assets. I had in my billiard game.
Let's see black and blue, brown and green that's eight I got eight different assets loaded here or prefixed in their asset key name with the word ball and then a color.
Not going to remember that. So I'm going to change these all in their asset keys, just to
Collection of
Assets all one through eight will get them here worry about the color.
Use these, as I said, as a group on array for my emitter. So now I've got
Eight different ball game assets loaded ball one through eight
And in the preload code. I'll go ahead and keep the background color, and I'll keep the physics engine turned on p two for kicks can't hurt to do all that. Then I'm going to delete all the rest of this code.
I'll get rid of the sound effect to
Do you want to watch when the spacebar gets press the spacebar getting press is going to be the trigger for my particle system to start emitting particles.
So let's define
An emitter or a particle system.
And the emitter is covered in the phase or see documentation. So you can look there if you want more information. There's also quite a few examples.
Of particle systems use for p two, or for Fazer addition to community edition up in phase or.io is example. So be sure to check those out. Also, I'll give you the basics of getting an emitter to work. So I define my variable called emitter up there as a global variable.
What go ahead and assign him a value. Now to gain an emitter now an emitter takes a collection of arguments to be properly defined. Let's talk about what we do when we add an emitter. We need an X coordinate
Need a y coordinate. So the first two things. So let's see. How big did I make this game.
Let's just make it
600 wide.
300 tall.
And so I'll place the sky smack in the middle so 300 come on comma 150 so I got my x and y coordinate for the emitter established I can move the emitter around later on. But I'm going to leave that. And then I need to tell it how many articles.
It can emit
With 200 for fun and grand effect. So that's a lot of particles.
That's the basic setup for the emitter
Now let's call it. Step one.
Is to associate
Assets.
As particles.
We would assign an asset to a sprite, we can assign assets to the emitter
You're going to tell it now through the make particles method that we want to associate an array of asset keys and so noticing inside the ground parentheses. I'm going to pass it a single argument.
One are an array of assets.
Strings right so we know I've got ball one
Ball to
All three
To start with, so we got four different assets. Now in the array of available visuals to us for our emitter
Now we can also apply gravity to the emitter
Also set transparency on the particles.
I'll give him a range and from one which is 100% opaque to zero which is fully transparent and 3000 as an amount of time to reverse those values.
Can also set the scale on them. Again, this is a range will go 0.5 to zero and 0.5 to zero because again we're saying scale range for the X and the Y scale and again and amount of time for those to travel those. So setting alpha and scale.
Particles will be animated
This range of alpha
In this range of scale.
So that's basically what we can do in create to prepare the emitter
Now when the spacebar gets pressed in the sky. Let's go ahead and delete all the rest of this junk here.
So we have a very simple update loop there is our update loop if the spacebar is pressed
We will emit particles.
So,
To get an emitter going
We can say emitter start
And there's a few arguments we can set with the start method for an emitter
So let's document those
So the first thing we could tell it is a Boolean should all particles.
Come out at once. Oh, happy explode.
A true to start off with, and see what that looks like. And we can play by changing that to fall and see her changes a particle system.
Then we can set a lifespan.
each particle in milliseconds.
Let's go for one and a half seconds.
Anything we can do
For using the burst or explode mode, it's going to be ignored. So we'll set it to know
In our fourth property.
How many particles will be emitted in a single burst.
Let's see what happens with this much of this guy baked into
There we go. I had to reset my zoom level very zoomed in.
Let's see if we got anything going on with this preview here.
There we go. So hit the spacebar and you see these guys popping out of that position where the emitter is at
And we're spinning out, it looks like about 100 of those
And let's play with some of these variables. Now,
Arguments that we can manipulate
Number particles admitted for a second.
Negative gravity.
So notice the gravity pulls the particles away.
Gravity of zero.
Again, you don't have to apply gravity to particle system. This gives you the kind of the most balanced bursting notice there's a lot of randomization going on, which sprites are being used, or excuse me, which assets are being used.
And their velocity and the way they're traveling and the alpha that they go through
And the scale that they go through they shrink thanks to that scale being diminished over time.
Now we can affect other things.
We can also set in emitters particle speed.
And working with the main emitter object, we can see
Particle
Speed
And we can set that in x and y.
We can also set the maximum particle speed.
Also an x and a y
Darn zoom bar always gets in the way there. Let's get him out of the way.
Bar.
Did I write a typo.
Time to look in the console.
Oops, I forgot the set method.
My bad. So particle speed needs a set method associated with it. So dots set
This is not a method by itself.
If you can see how dramatically different.
Things get if we start to manipulate things like the particle speed.
And a question. Yes.
Yeah, absolutely. I your question will about attaching emitter to a sprite like a for a spaceship or something. Definitely, definitely possible. If you place the emitters x and y coordinates.
In line with your Sprite, you basically have quote unquote attached it just move the emitter around
In the game world to match the placement of the sprite and realize that the emitter. It is a separate object.
From the sprite, but by default the emitter itself is invisible. So for example, let's take a quick look. And I'll share this this week.
At some student work from previous semesters. And so these are some links to games that students have created in past semesters using both Fazer and the Unity engine and here this game exile, which
Might take a moment to load, because then it could have some audio associated with it. It uses a particle system to create the flame coming out of the back of the spaceship.
Hopefully it's gonna finish loading. I think, again, it's got a big audio file.
Little green plane to tailor the spaceship is in the military.
So definitely doable.
And really particle systems lend themselves to that kind of simulation of real world effects like flames and explosions fire and smoke really well. It's what they're typically used for an animation and in game development.
So,
I'd like to with our time available today shift my focus now to looking back a bit and talking about what we've covered so far we've been together for 10 weeks already
10 different modules and material mostly focused on two things JavaScript and
The phase or game engine.
Now wrapped up in that is also some general concepts.
About game engines generally in video game development that are covered. And so to
Prepare for this midterm exam.
In which there are only 14 questions selected from a randomly from a larger set of questions that you might get you'll have two hours to tackle.
Three major topic areas.
JavaScript programming basics game programming concepts and the phase your library itself.
So the things that get covered in JavaScript programming basics are just essential
control structures and declarations like creating variables that we need to be able to pull off to
Build the mechanics for basic video game. So the idea of variables. The data types of both arrays and object values which are heavily used in the phase or engine.
The use of dot notation to access individual property values inside an object or to call a method of an object to call a functional block code stored in objects and conditions and loop. So those are the key.
Aspects of the JavaScript language that you should be comfortable with.
JavaScript just for a second.
Do this without worrying about the engine need to know about variables.
Variable outside
Of any function gives it global scope.
Keep that in mind.
Variable
inside a function
Makes it a local variable. And when I say declaring we use the bar statement.
Statement to declare a new
Container
Variable
Define a variable called my local inside my code and then I call my code.
And I try and log to the console my local variable.
We pop this guy open into a new browser window and we go look in the console.
See what console log. I'm getting an error, my local is not defined. It tells me online 19 in my code.
And that is true. You can see
Cloud nine caught that error two variables that are declared with a var statement or let statement inside of the curly braces of a function are only available inside that function.
curlies here. So inside of here.
I'm sold out log
My local variable totally will work. And notice I'm not getting an error and Cloud nine either here.
Boom. It spits out five because within the curlies that variable scope is available after the curlies. Nope. No dice.
If we want to set a pre existing
Global variables value.
Sign a new value.
Out.
Using bar or let again if I want to change my global just say my global equals don't say bar again now.
When I run that code.
I've changed my global. And I did that change inside the current release of a function that's okay as long as the variables declared before the curlies before the function, you are good to go.
Now, creating object values and reading object values.
Good thing to know how to do. And of course Fazer creates a huge number of object values for us when we define our game when we find any sprite returns to our variables a curly braces object structure that includes properties.
That can have values.
Variable
Curly braces object structure to it with property names, you can use dot notation to access those properties.
So if I have this variable called My object.
And I want to access the value stored in the property named my property. I use dot notation.
Property
So boom that alert spits out the text that stored in my property. It's inside my object by using that dot notation syntax. My object.my property so
Basically every period.
Signifies
We've crossed into. So if I write my object. And I want to get to my property. Well, there's one curly brace between the two of those guys. So when I write the dot notation and basically right my object.my property.
Now in Fazer we've seen cases where there are many dots and dot notation syntax and that is because
We can have other object values.
For themselves as curly braces objects inside of a property. So if I have a property called object bow.
And inside him.
Creates more properties.
Notation to access that inner nested object value.
So again, every time I cross curly I put a.in the dot notation. So to get from my object down to object Val. There's one curly in the way. So I write my object dot object Val, then I see the object Val itself as a curly braced
Object value stored in it. And so to get inside of there. There's another curly to cross. So I read another dot and then I write the property name. So my object object Val second should retrieve the phrase monster using dot notation.
There he is.
Monster.
Fabulous.
So working with object values something you've implicitly been doing working Fazer and we talked about it a long time ago. We even did it when we played code combat.
Hero dot move left well there you're executing a method on the object of hero.
And conditional statements.
Statements, if you will, are critical to us.
We could ask a question about if my global is greater than 10
On the screen.
We do that with an if statement inside parentheses, we make a comparison. And if the answer is true.
We can also have an optional else clause.
Interest also optional else block would only run if that condition that we test their sales and gives us back a false
We get that big number spit out there because if evaluated is true.
Variables arrays object values dot notation conditional some loops are the critical things to be comfortable with inside of JavaScript to work efficiently in the language. So the last thing I'll mention here are raised and loops an array variable.
Is a list of values contained in square braces.
Now I could write a loop using the four
Statement in JavaScript.
Each
Value.
In our array, if we want to loop through each of those four takes
The
Setup expressions we define a counter variable and the first thing
We
Have a condition test whether to run loop again.
For. Second thing. The third thing is operation to perform on counter variable.
Here in the first thing I could say bar i equals 00. Now, I could say if i is less than the number of elements.
In our array by using the length property have any array variable. It has a property that we can write using dot notation. So array dot length for this particular collection of values that are defined in my variable Maya re will give me back a number four.
And I could say I equals i plus one. Or I could write it condensed is the increment operator just say i plus plus.
And in that way, I could have
output to the console as a demo individual values individual elements from that list of
Values in my array by using a range notations square brackets and a number I can retrieve each individual element by its index position by where it sits
Potentially in the race. So my array zero will give me back the number five, because that's the first element my array square brackets one will give me back the value 10
So in this way, we can move through and work with all the values in an array.
So here's the output from that move if walk through each value in my array.
Now we've seen as well Fazer has a method called for each that that you walk through each Sprite in a group. It's basically a loop construction of its own.
Working with basic JavaScript control structures variables conditional loops.
And these two data types of an array and an object value. Those are the bread and butter of JavaScript programming for game engines like Fazer
The game programming concepts we've covered are very well articulated in our textbook reading, I'll say just a little bit about them now.
Being familiar with the terminology of assets and sprites sprites being game objects that are game engine pays especially close attention to, to detect things like collisions.
The ability to tweet or to move a game object of Sprite between two locations and transform it over time.
Idea that the players view in the browser. The rendered visual
Of the game is determined by the games camera that is watching the game play. It's an important concept to have strayed
The idea that we can only work with physics engine properties on a sprite by referring to that sprites body.
And that physics considers the sprite with this extra attribute of suddenly having a physical body in the world that
can manipulate and that can be responded to by other objects and collisions. The idea that all the game objects in our world.
Live in a display list. It's basically a big array of objects that refresh. Each time the game loop is executed in our world, the states of Fazer preload CREATE AN UPDATE GIVE US A path to preload assets to create sprite.
And then in the update game loop to manage their collisions there tweens. Are they on camera. Do we have a physics engine enabled, and if so, how does their body get affected by it. So game programming concepts. I think you'll find
Easy to recall through a very simple review of the chapters that we've covered in our book.
And if you've got more interest in this and this is well beyond the scope of was asked in the midterm. So don't worry about this.
If you want to focus purely on the midterm and its scope, but when you get done with the midterm exam and you're wondering, you know, how does the game engine really work.
Check out this great article by Harold Serrano that unpack with a developer's mind how a game engine really works.
And he does a great job of walking through the different components of the software that is Fazer and also unity3d and
Unreal Engine and game maker all these different tools that we use to make games they all have inside of their code.
These functionalities that are described by Harold Serrano in this short article. How does a game engine work. So I invite you to check that out. It's got some great details, give you a better sense of how game engines really work.
The third section of the midterm exam again pretty simple. We've been working with Fazer we see the pattern now of how to make a Fazer based game.
And fundamental that are those states, I just mentioned the idea that the phase or engine loads blocks of our code in our coding pattern to date by simple functions.
That are reflected back into its state based model of pre loading then creating and then going into the game loop where update and render are called over and over again so that we can do debugging and rendering of our gameplay and we see that all the time.
In our code.
When we create the game.
So every time we make a new game object from a phase or game template.
We're telling it as the last argument we pass it in an object value what the names of the functional blocks of code or that it should use for its preload. It's create its update and its render which is optional.
States. Remember update and render always run in the game loop over and over again so update and render are being repeated as gameplay happens over time preload runs once. And the very first thing that happens, create runs after preload and then the update and render game loop start
Remember the concept of spreadsheets. It's a specific implementation and Fazer but it's a general concept that many game engines support, including unity.
And Unreal Engine idea that we could combine many bit maps for different frames for an individual sprite into a single graphic and then we can define the dimensions of each of those frames.
Remember the concept of input, the ability to look at the keyboard or to get data from the mouse point pitcher all conducted in phase or through this master input game object.
Think about how audio works, how do you get an A sound to start. Once you pre loaded its asset.
And have some comfort to with this idea that we talked about today of pooling and lifespans. The idea that you can kill and reset.
sprites that you've already defined so you don't have to create the sprites during the update loop, but instead you can make a big sprite pool during the Create state of any game that you can then reuse over and over again.
This is the terrain of the midterm exam this week.
And you can see here the midterm available to you towards 70 points and it's not due until next Thursday night, November 8
So in addition to this being the week where we
Reflect back on where we've been in the past 10 weeks. It's also the week. We're kind of at the top of the peak here of knowledge that we can have acquired about Fazer
And now we can see the lay of the land, we've seen many Fazer game examples. Again, I got examples of student final projects that I'll share with you in
Canvas this week.
To get through the journey of building a final project for this class. There are three major steps to success. The first is just having an idea.
And this assignment this week, the draft game design document really ask you just to articulate your idea.
As a draft. It's not your final commitment, you'll have another chance in two weeks to develop a final version of your game design document your final proposal for what you want to build
But this week blue sky, a little bit to find something that you'd like to build it could be a game you've already started to create in our earlier.
Assignments. It could be a remix a riff on a game example you found in some of the tutorials it fazer.io or in other people's sites like HTML5 game developers.
Or the code and web folks who have many examples really the Fazer engine has hundreds and hundreds of example projects that are tutorial.
Based all over the internet available for you and our book in chapter seven, the chapter, we haven't really touched yet.
Is filled with a collection of example games built using an object oriented class based programming style that I'll introduce next week. And I've got all of those games.
Working in a workspace that I've shared a link to this week so you can come in and open up any one of these games and see how it works. So let's look at their platform or, for example.
simply do a live preview of the index file for any one of these games. So you just open it up.
Do a live preview.
And the game will load.
And you can play any one of these example games.
These games are available. The code is in the book and annotated by the author of a book.
So you can see exactly how he built these games with a lot of support. And so those games are available as well.
For you to consider re mixing as your final project.
Next week, everybody will have a chance to look at each other's game design documents.
Again, these are just Google Docs or Microsoft Word or PDF files that you'll create and submit for week 11 in the draft form now.
This assignment, the draft and the final game design documents they represent two assignments that are worth individually 100 points each. So there's no coding requirements for these, these are
Design and vision documents where you're articulating what you want to do.
And then we'll go in to a process of building these games over the last month with weekly build and take play test sprints where other students can look at each other's works.
So this week, your challenges are simple take the midterm exam. After you've done some review of our materials. If you've been keeping up with the homework assignments. You are well positioned to
Have an excellent score on the midterm exam if you're behind on some homework assignments. Do the review anyway and take the exam. You can turn in your homework assignments later on.
And then turn your attention towards this world of game design documents so you can get a handle on what it takes to build one
And we've got great resources for that this week. If you look at the exam at the assignment, you'll see
A link on designing your first game again the concept of a minimum viable product, also called an MVP, not to be confused with most valuable player, but the minimum viable product.
Is really where you should focus your attention and the rest of the semester, do not plan on building an entire version of fortnight.
Or Assassin's Creed in the time we have left. Imagine that you can prototype. The gameplay for a fun and engaging game.
In the time we have left. And so, set your sights on the minimum that you think it takes to be successful. So check out that extra credits video helps you set your expectations. Right.
And then check out the article from Bender waffles. It's only five minutes long as video called What is a game design document.
And then we have friends at trick gaming studios. They've given us a template and they walk us through how to write a game design document.
They will walk you through every section of the template that we are using which is their template. It's linked in this week's assignment and they'll walk you through all the sections of that template step by step.
So again to get your head around preparing for what you want to build check out
The game examples from Chapter seven in the workspace that I'm linking to here. I'll put it in Canvas as well check out past students game projects. You can see them a collection of them. I think there's let's see 2456 810 there's 10 games here that you can play from past semesters.
Or look around the world of the internet where dozens and dozens of Fazer game examples exist that you can remix and riff off of and be inspired by
Check out trick gaming studios article on how to write a game design document, you can download their templates straight off our assignment this week and Canvas.
And you'll see it basically is an eight point outline where you can talk about in little chunks like a paragraph and each chunk.
Exactly how your game is going to work.
This is your draft screenplay, if you will, if you think about a game as a film as an interactive experience that people can engage in
Just like a film a game has a cast of characters potentially a scenario, a world to define goals challenges all those game aesthetics that we talked about when we were thinking about mechanics dynamics and aesthetics. They can all be expressed in your game design document.
And that's enough for everybody already to tackle this week.
If
You want more. And this isn't if this is an extra credit opportunity for the next seven weeks. Weeks 11 through 17 the last regular week of our semester.
I will be providing in a separate part of each weekly module materials to introduce the Unity 3D game engine a completely different game engine than Fazer
One that once worked with JavaScript, but now no longer works with JavaScript relies on the C sharp language, which is another high level scripting language, similar to JavaScript, but different.
And this extra credit material is for people who are comfortable coding
Unity 3D environment will require you to do coding it does have a number of other differences as an environment, however.
unity3d is a complete desktop application that represents an integrated development environment. It is an authoring software program.
So unlike Fazer which is simply a code base that we have to load and then we construct our entire game code unity gives you a graphical user interface for manipulating your game world and working with sprites and game assets, all in one integrated environment.
For that reason, it's a big, complex terrain to cover and this is purely extra credit opportunity to look at unity3d in our class.
So check it out if you want. You'll see each week from now on when we look at the high level module for week 11 a section labeled extra credit
And there's extra materials there and there's also in each week an extra credit assignment available if you dive in.
Now, if you're hungry for extra credit points I will let on that this first week is really just about getting unity installed to look around in it.
And so if you want 10 points extra credit for whatever reason, getting through this week's extra credit work around unity is simple. There's no coding required
So what to do next. Well,
Check out the last 10 pages of Chapter six to get a familiarity with some of the advanced capabilities of the Fraser engine.
What we looked at today. We're particle systems and I talked extensively about object pooling and the kill and reset methods as well as the exists and lifespan properties that are available to you to take sprites out of the game world, but keep them available in memory.
Assignment 11 really does walk you in to the
Process of articulating a vision a blueprint a plan for a game that you want to build. Remember, this is a draft, it's worth 100 points, please do this assignment, you'll have a chance to revise it and week 13
And you'll get another hundred points, then if you complete these so tackle that work. It's important to tackle.
Not wait too long. We'll run at a time to build a game. If we don't all get started now.
And the midterm exam 14 questions covering JavaScript in the phase or game engine basic game concepts I expect all of you who've been making your way through the homework will do very well on the midterm.
And that's everything there is to do so. Thanks for joining me today. If you've got questions about anything. As always, jump into Canvas. We've got weekly
Sharing support discussions. I'm going to start encouraging people more and more to share their game and progress work so that everybody can be inspired by each other's work as we go into the final stretch here.
So I'll see you online. Thanks for joining me today.